wordplay, the crossword column Kerfuffle Seth Bisen-Hersh's debut puzzle was meant to be. I would like a piece of this loaf-shaped cake, please. Jump to: | Today's Theme MONDAY PUZZLE — Congratulations to Seth Bisen-Hersh, who is the first debut constructor of 2023! Mr. Bisen-Hersh has an impressive résumé in the arts — see his Constructor Notes below — so it's only fitting that he add a New York Times Crossword as a feather in his cap. I adore Mr. Bisen-Hersh's clever theme, which I predict will cause quite a kerfuffle among solvers. It's not every day that we see such an excellent revealer, and the execution of the theme, with minimal junk crossword fill in the grid, is top-notch. Let's take a peek at some of the “tougher” (by Monday standards) clues in today's puzzle before unpacking the fabulous theme. 58A. Like I said, these clues are the tougher ones in the puzzle, but it's all relative. I'm guessing that a majority of solvers know the corny math joke “Why was 6 afraid of 7? Because 7 ATE 9!” — but for those of you out there who hadn't heard it before, I hope this brought you joy. 63A. “Kerfuffle” is just such a funny word for “to-do” or “hubbub” or, as we see in today's puzzle, STIR. 3D. The “it” in the clue “It's very unlikely to happen” refers to the entry itself. The thing that is very unlikely to happen is a BIG IF — which some solvers may recall was the theme of a different puzzle in 2021! 5D. The clue “8-Across (AWARD) for some New York plays” is evidently a personal one for Mr. Bisen-Hersh. The answer here is OBIE, which is an award given to excellent Off Broadway shows. 10D. “___-backwards (utterly wrong, in slang)” is a fun clue for ASS. It's nice to see ASS clued in reference to something other than the beast of burden! 20D. BABKA is my very favorite type of “Loaf-shaped cake.” 54D. Here's a bit of crossword fill that veteran solvers will have memorized and new solvers may be perplexed by: Clues that take the form “[season] hours in [place]” are generally asking you to identify a time zone in relation to daylight saving time. Therefore, “Winter hrs. in L.A.” is the clue for PST — Pacific Standard Time — as opposed to P.D.T., which would be the summer hours in L.A. Today's Theme Wow, I was NOT expecting the revealer in today's puzzle. As usual, I tried to play “guess the theme” during my solve, pausing after each theme entry (identifiable by their status as the longest Across entries or, in the online solving interface, by highlighting). The first theme entry, TRIBUTE ALBUM (“The 2005 compilation 'Killer Queen' is one honoring Queen”), didn't give me much to go on, although it did give me an excuse to look up the various songs on “Killer Queen.” I enjoyed this Flaming Lips cover of “Bohemian Rhapsody” quite a bit. I soon found the second theme entry, BUNSEN BURNER (“Chemistry lab device”), which had me totally flummoxed. HAMBURGER BUN brought me no closer to thematic clarity. What on earth do a TRIBUTE ALBUM, a BUNSEN BURNER and a HAMBURGER BUN have to do with one another?! Feeling completely at sea, I read the clue for the revealer at 50A with no small amount of trepidation: “Classic song about a soulmate … or a phonetic hint for repeated pairs of letters in 19-, 27- and 42-Across.” I blinked at the clue. I blinked again. And then, with the help of some crosses, I filled in IT HAD TO BE YOU. After a few more seconds of pondering, a light bulb went off. If you read this song title as “It had two B-U,” it perfectly describes the theme entries, each of which contains two pairs of B and U (TRI BU TE AL BU M, BU NSEN BU RNER, HAM BU RGER BU N). Aha! This is a brilliant phonetic revealer, an excellent theme set and an auspicious debut for Mr. Bisen-Hersh. I look forward to seeing more from him in the future. Happy New Year! I'm thrilled to have my debut on the first Monday of 2023! I'm an award-winning composer/lyricist based in New York City. My musical “Love Quirks” ran Off Broadway this summer for three months. Being a true multihyphenate, I have also written books, produced/starred in a sitcom pilot and have a podcast, music videos and more. This theme came to me in my sleep. For some reason the song was in my head, and I said to someone in my dream: “This could be a crossword theme!” Indeed, I'm such a workaholic that I often write songs in my dreams, but this is the first time I came up with a puzzle theme subconsciously. When I woke up, I was happy to find out this was an original theme, which is not always the case. I first searched phrases that were *B*U*B*U* but was pleasantly surprised to find that my favorite ones had BU together. [ Rachel's note: The asterisks represent unspecified strings of letters in searches of word databases, which are often used by crossword constructors to find words or phrases that match a specific letter pattern. ] In fact, you will find few other usable answers if you search *bu*bu*, so it was a miracle the theme answers worked lengthwise with each other — in fact, you could say (and I will) it had to be them! Want to Submit Crosswords to The New York Times? The New York Times Crossword has an open submission system, and you can submit your puzzles online For tips on how to get started, read our series, “ How to Make a Crossword Puzzle .” Almost finished solving, but need a bit more help? We've got you covered. Spoiler alert: Subscribers can take a peek at the answer key Trying to get back to the main Gameplay page? You can find it here Rachel Fabi, Ph.D., is a longtime solver, constructor and reviewer of crossword puzzles. She writes the Monday-Wednesday daily Wordplay columns, helping new solvers improve their skills and commenting on the daily crossword.